---
layout: project
name: elixir-steers
title: "ELIXIR-STEERS"
path: elixir-steers.html
collection: projects
description: Developing, consolidating and optimising ELIXIR as an European research infrastructure
#logo: steers.svg
#website: http://example.eu/
start_date: 2024-03
duration: 36 months
#project_reference: https://doi.org/10.3030/101131096
---

[ELIXIR](http://elixir-europe.org/) unites Europe’s leading life science organisations in managing and safeguarding the increasing volume of data being
generated by publicly funded research. 
It coordinates, integrates and sustains bioinformatics resources across its [23 nodes](https://elixir-europe.org/about-us/who-we-are/nodes). 

ELIXIR enables users in academia and industry to access [services](https://elixir-europe.org/what-we-offer) (databases, software, training, standards, compute) provided through national Nodes. 
ELIXIR is the ESFRI Landmark for life science data and plays a unique role in the landscape, with millions of users globally, supporting the digital-needs of other ESFRIs and Horizon Europe research projects.

Increasingly, life-science data is held at national and institutional centres. Thus, large-scale data analytics requires that researchers can find and analyse data distributed across Europe. 

The purpose of **ELIXIR-STEERS** is to build capacity for large-scale, cross-border data analysis and for this capacity to be embedded across member states. 
ELIXIR-STEERS directly benefit Europe’s life scientists by allowing software and workflows to meet requirements of those using them in national centres. 
A ‘robust, reproducible and green’ approach to software and workflow provision will ensure that scientists have access to high quality, energy-efficient analysis tools. 

The project will also develop the crediting and recognition systems for software, supporting improvements to research assessment frameworks.
Further, ELIXIR-STEERS supports ELIXIR’s long-term operations by addressing the recommendations of the European Commission and ESFRI on the long-term sustainability of research infrastructures. 

It will strengthen the operational excellence of ELIXIR’s Nodes; support the training and development of professional and scientific staff in ELIXIR Nodes; expand the membership of ELIXIR to new countries, especially widening countries; enable international collaborations in particular with Latin America and Africa; and stimulate innovation and industry engagement.
Training-wise we will connect with our ELIXIR training portals [TeSS](products/tess/) and [RDMkit](/products/rdmkit/).

### eScienceLab involvement

eScience Lab will contribute work on credit and attribution for workflows in [WorkflowHub](/products/workflowhub), reuse of WorkflowHub workflows, [Workflow RO-Crate](https://w3id.org/workflowhub/workflow-ro-crate/), [FAIR Computational Workflows](https://workflows.community/groups/fair/) and [Bioschemas](/activities/bioschemas/).    

UNIMAN contributions:

* WP3: Infrastructure services to enable adoption and deployment of software best practices
 - O3.1: Make software, tools, and workflows first class citizens for assessment of researchers
 - O3.2: Stimulate the usage of Software Management Plans to support sustainable research software
 - O3.3: Benchmark resource usage for computational tasks in life sciences 
 - O3.4: Implement resource optimisation features in workflow management systems
 - T3.1: Enable crediting scientists for research assets
 - T3.3: Identify fit-for-purpose reproducible workflows through technical and scientific benchmarking
* WP4: Strengthening and equipping ELIXIR Nodes and Node staff with key skills and resources in organisation, management and training
 - O4.1: Embedding good practices in ELIXIR Node operations, equipping Nodes, established and new, with guidelines on how to be(come) sustainable and effective.
 - T4.2: Organisational and research management capacity for Nodes
 - T4.3: Capacity building in training skills for ELIXIR Node staff
